CHAPTER 1 
Funding 
Article 17 
Types of funding 
1. 	Union funding may take the following legal forms: 
(a) grants; 
(b) public procurement contracts; 
(c) contributions to financial instruments in accordance with provisions on financial instruments under Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, in particular Articles 139 and 140 thereof, and with operational requirements set out in specific Union acts; 
(d) any other interventions needed for the purpose of achieving the general objectives set out in Article 3. 
2. The Commission shall implement this Regulation in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. 
3. Funding under this Regulation which constitutes state aid within the meaning of Article 107(1) TFEU shall be implemented in a way consistent with the relevant Union state aid rules. 
4. At least 81 % of the budgetary resources for the LIFE Programme shall be allocated to projects supported by way of action grants or, where appropriate, financial instruments as referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1. 
The Commission may include those financial instruments as part of the multiannual work programme referred to in Article 24, subject to an ex-ante evaluation as referred to in point (f) of Article 140(2) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. 
5. A maximum of 30 % of the budgetary resources allocated to action grants in accordance with paragraph 4 may be allocated to integrated projects. That maximum percentage shall be re-evaluated in the framework of the mid-term evaluation of the LIFE Programme referred to in point (a) of Article 27(2) and accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. 
Article 18 
Projects 
Action grants may finance the following projects: 
(a) pilot projects; 
(b) demonstration projects; 
(c) best practice projects; 
(d) integrated projects; 
(e) technical assistance projects; 
(f) capacity-building projects; 
(g) preparatory projects; 
(h) information, awareness, and dissemination projects; 
(i) any other projects needed for the purpose of achieving the general objectives set out in Article 3. 
Article 19 
Eligibility and award criteria and project selection 
1. Projects referred to in Article 18 shall satisfy the eligibility criteria based on the definitions set out in Article 2 and the following award criteria: 
(a) being of Union interest by making a significant contribution to the achievement of one of the general objectives of the LIFE Programme set out in Article 3 as well as the specific objectives for the priority areas listed in Article 9, the thematic priorities set out in Annex III, or the specific objectives for the priority areas listed in Article 13; 
(b) ensuring a cost-effective approach and being technically and financially coherent; and 
(c) being sound in the proposed implementation. 
2. The award of projects shall be subject to the projects meeting minimum quality requirements in conformity with the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
3. Projects financed by the LIFE Programme under one priority area shall avoid undermining environmental or climate objectives in another priority area and, where possible, promote synergies between different objectives as well as the use of green public procurement. 
4. The Commission shall ensure geographical balance for integrated projects by indicatively allocating at least three integrated projects to each Member State, ensuring at least one integrated project under the sub-programme for Environment and at least one integrated project under the sub-programme for Climate Action during the LIFE programming period referred to in Article 1. 
Integrated projects shall be distributed with a view to meeting the targets set in accordance with point (c) of Article 24(2) for each of the areas referred to in point (d) of Article 2. 
In order to evaluate compliance with the provision of mobilisation of Union, national or private funds referred to in point (d) of Article 2, proposals for integrated projects shall be accompanied by: 
(a) at the first stage of the application process: a financial plan; and 
(b) at the second stage of the application process: at least one letter of intent indicating the extent to which other relevant Union, national or private funding sources are to be mobilised, and specifying such sources of funding. 
5. The Commission shall, for the duration of the first multiannual work programme, ensure geographical balance for projects other than integrated projects submitted under the sub- programme for Environment, by proportionately distributing funds among all Member States according to indicative national allocations established in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I. Where indicative national allocations are not applicable, projects shall be selected exclusively on the basis of merit. 
6. If the sum of co-financing that is necessary for funding projects, other than integrated projects, that are submitted by a Member State, and that are on the list compiled by the Commission at the end of the selection procedure is less than the indicative allocation for that Member State, the Commission shall, subject to the conditions laid down in paragraphs 1 and 2 being met, use the balance of that indicative national allocation to co-finance those projects submitted by other Member States, excluding projects in OCTs, that make the greatest contribution to the achievement of the general objectives set out in Article 3. 
When presenting the list of projects to be co-financed, the Commission shall report to the Committee for the LIFE Programme for the Environment and Climate Action on how it took into account the allocation criteria established in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5. 
7. The Commission shall have special regard to transnational projects where transnational cooperation is essential to guarantee environmental protection and climate objectives, and shall endeavour to ensure that at least 15 % of the budgetary resources dedicated to projects are allocated to transnational projects. The Commission shall consider the award of funding to transnational projects even in cases where the indicative national allocation balance of one or more Member States participating in those transnational projects has been exceeded. 
8. During the first multiannual work programme, a Member State shall be eligible for funding for one capacity-building project up to an amount of EUR 1 000 000 provided it meets one of the following criteria: 
(a) the Member State's average absorption level of its indicative national allocation for the years 2010, 2011 and 2012, as established under Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 614/2007, is below 70 %; 
(b) the Member State's GDP per capita in 2012 was below 90 % of the Union average; or 
(c) the Member State acceded to the Union after 1 January 2013. 
During the second multiannual work programme, a Member State shall be eligible for funding for one capacity-building project up to an amount of EUR 750 000 provided it meets the following criteria: 
(a) the Member State's average absorption level of its indicative national allocation for the years 2014, 2015 and 2016, referred to in paragraph 5, is below 70 %; and 
(b) the Member State's average absorption level of its indicative national allocation for the years 2014, 2015 and 2016 has increased compared to the average absorption level for the years 2010, 2011 and 2012. 
In order to be eligible for funding for capacity-building projects, a Member State shall commit to maintaining resources dedicated to the LIFE Programme, including inter alia staffing levels, at levels that are no lower than those in place in 2012, for the duration of the relevant multiannual work programme. That commitment shall be set out in the capacity-building plan referred to in paragraph 9. 
By way of exception to the eligibility provisions of the first and second subparagraphs and for the entire duration of the LIFE Programme, a Member State shall be ineligible for funding for capacity-building projects if its GDP per capita in 2012 was above 105 % of the Union average. Funding for capacity-building projects shall be limited to one project per Member State per multiannual work programme.
9. The Commission shall establish a fast-track award procedure for all capacity-building projects. Applications for such capacity-building projects may be submitted as from 23 December 2013. Applications shall be based on a capacity-building plan to be agreed between the Member State and the Commission outlining the interventions to be funded by the LIFE Programme in order to develop the Member State's capacity to submit successful applications for funding for projects under the sub-programmes for Environment and Climate Action. Such interventions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(a) recruitment of new personnel and training for LIFE national or regional contact points; 
(b) facilitating exchanges of experience and best practices and promoting the dissemination and use of results of projects under the LIFE Programme; 
(c) 'train the trainer' approaches; 
(d) exchange and secondment programmes between public authorities in Member States, in particular 'best in class' exchange activities. 
The interventions covered by the capacity-building plan may include the procurement of experts to address ad-hoc gaps in technical and process capability, but may not include the procurement of experts whose primary function is the drafting of proposals for submission under the annual calls for proposals. 
The capacity-building plan shall also outline estimates for the costs of such interventions. 
Article 20 
Co-financing rates and eligibility of costs for projects 
1. The maximum co-financing rates for the projects referred to in Article 18 shall be: 
(a) for the duration of the first multiannual work programme, up to 60 % of eligible costs for all projects, other than those specified in point (c), funded under both sub-programmes for Environment and Climate Action; 
(b) for the duration of the second multiannual work programme, up to 55 % of eligible costs for all projects, other than those specified in point (c), funded under both sub-programmes for Environment and Climate Action; (c) for the entire duration of the LIFE Programme: 
(i) up to 60 % of eligible costs for projects referred to in points (d), (e) and (g) of Article 18; 
(ii) subject to point (iii), up to 60 % of eligible costs for projects funded under the priority area Nature and Biodiversity in the sub-programme for Environment; 
(iii) up to 75 % of eligible costs for projects funded under the priority area Nature and Biodiversity in the sub- programme for Environment that concern priority habitats or species for the implementation of Directive 92/43/EEC or the species of birds considered as a priority for funding by the Committee for Adaptation to Technical and Scientific Progress set up pursuant to Article 16 of Directive 2009/147/EC when necessary to achieve the conservation objective; 
(iv) up to 100 % of eligible costs for projects referred to in point (f) of Article 18. 
2. Conditions for the eligibility of costs are laid down in Article 126 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. Such costs shall include VAT and staff costs. 
The Commission shall provide an overview, in the mid-term and ex-post evaluations of the LIFE Programme, of VAT reimbursements per Member State that project beneficiaries under the LIFE Programme have requested at the final payment stage. 
3. Costs relating to the purchase of land shall be considered eligible for Union financing for projects referred to in Article 18 provided that: 
(a) the purchase will contribute to improving, maintaining and restoring the integrity of the Natura 2000 network set up under Article 3 of Directive 92/43/EEC, including through improving connectivity by the creation of corridors, stepping stones, or other elements of green infrastructure; 
(b) land purchase is the only or most cost-effective way of achieving the desired conservation outcome; 
(c) the land purchased is reserved in the long term for uses consistent with the objectives set out in Articles 11, 14 or 15; and 
(d) the Member State concerned shall, by way of transfer or otherwise, ensure the long-term assignment of such land to nature conservation purposes. 
Article 21 
Operating grants 
1. Operating grants shall support certain operational and administrative costs of non-profit making entities which pursue an aim of general Union interest, are primarily active in the field of environment or climate action and are involved in the development, implementation and enforcement of Union policy and legislation.
2. The maximum rate of Union co-financing for operating grants referred to in paragraph 1 shall be 70 % of eligible costs. 
Article 22 
Other types of activities 
The LIFE Programme may finance activities implemented by the Commission in support of the initiation, implementation and mainstreaming of Union environmental and climate policies and legislation for the purpose of achieving the general objectives set out in Article 3. Such activities may include: 
(a) information and communication, including awareness raising campaigns. Financial resources allocated to communication activities pursuant to this Regulation shall also cover corporate communication regarding the political priorities of the Union, as well as regarding the implementation and transposition status of all major Union environmental and climate legislation; 
(b) studies, surveys, modelling and scenario building; 
(c) preparation, implementation, monitoring, checking and evaluation of projects, policies, programmes and legislation; 
(d) workshops, conferences and meetings; 
(e) networking and best-practice platforms; 
(f) any other activities needed for the purpose of achieving the general objectives referred to in Article 3. 
Article 23 
Beneficiaries 
The LIFE Programme may fund public and private bodies. 
With a view to ensuring the visibility of the LIFE Programme, the beneficiaries shall publicise the LIFE Programme and the results of their projects, always mentioning the Union support received. The LIFE Programme logo, depicted in Annex II, shall be used for all communication activities and appear on notice boards at strategic places visible to the public. All durable goods acquired in the framework of the LIFE Programme shall bear the LIFE Programme logo except in cases specified by the Commission. 