PROJECT DESCRIPTION
BACKGROUND
The species and natural habitat types targeted by LIFE Clima-Bombina currently have a poor conservation status. They are located close to sea level and so are vulnerable to climate change, rising sea level and flooding. These species include the European fire-bellied toad (Bombina Bombina) and other amphibians and reptiles. They havesmall populations with poor genetic variation and are at risk of inbreeding.

Other threats to target species include overgrowth caused by insufficient grazing or mowing and accelerated by diffuse nutrient loads, inappropriate hydrology, fragmented habitats, and landowner and the general publics lack of knowledge about Natura 2000.


OBJECTIVES
The aim of the LIFE Clima-Bombina project is to obtain favourable conservation status for the European fire-bellied toad (Bombina bombina) and to contribute to obtaining a favourable conservation status for eight other animal species, nine natural habitat types and four bird species.

This means:

restoring and creating a large number of ponds for the Annex II species Bombina bombina and increasing the population with a supplementary breeding programme and improvements to hibernation areas;
securing existing and new areas which host nine Annex I habitat typesby comprehensively extending agricultural areas;
improving habitats for four bird species in Annex I of the Birds Directive;
supporting seven Annex IV species of amphibians/reptiles and one Annex II amphibian.
 

LIFE Clima-Bombina will contribute to halting the loss of biodiversity and support the Natura 2000 network. It will help implement the Habitats Directive and Birds Directive, address EU biodiversity strategy targets and support the EU Water Framework Directive. It will also support EU Rural Development policy and UN sustainable development goals.


RESULTS
Expected results:

a population of B. bombina of at least 2 000 individuals established within 5-10 years by: - building 29 new ponds elevated enough above sea level to prevent flooding; - managing 13 existing habitats and 45 new hibernation sites; - supplementary breeding and restocking of 7 500 individuals;
improved habitats and conservation status of seven other annex IV amphibians and one reptile species with at least 100 individuals per species;
connectivity between habitats ensured by extending at least 175ha of agricultural land for: calcareous grassland, dry grasslands, Nardus grassland, salt meadows, Molinia meadows, lowland hay meadows, lakes and grey dunes; and
a management plan for the project areas and an amphibian action plan.
