PROJECT DESCRIPTION
BACKGROUND
The long-term impact of the project is creation of an effective governance and management system of Emerald network in Ukraine as a basis for implementation of Birds and Habitats Directives and Natura2000 in Ukraine. The project will identify necessary changes in Ukrainian legislation and prepare a clear roadmap for steps leading to full transposition and implementation of the Directives into the Ukrainian legal system. A road map to enhance and improve the Emerald network will be provided. Organizational structure of nature conservation authorities in Ukraine will be assessed, enhancement will be proposed. Guidance documents highlighting best practice will be elaborated and disseminated. The capacity of Ukrainian authorities in nature conservation will be increased and opportunities to train new leaders in this field will be created. The project will identify the necessary steps to improve the management and monitoring of Emerald/Natura2000 sites, together with a realistic plan. The Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources of Ukraine as an associated partner is devoted to take the developed policy paper and proposals for increasing institutional capacity as a basis for the preparation of institutional reform in the field of nature protection with the purpose of bringing it closer to EU best practices. Demonstration of the practical implementation of the requirements of the Directives on the example of the Emerald Network pilot site will be carried out and the results will be replicated in outher sites of the network. The capacity and willingness of the young generation/future public officials for the implementation of the Directives will be improved. Key stakeholder groups and the wider public will be engaged into establishment of a good governance and management system of natural protection. The partnership between Ukraine and the Czech Republic (and the EU) will be strengthened, personal contacts established and further cooperation encouraged.

