PROJECT DESCRIPTION
BACKGROUND
Mobile marine species suffer from various threats at sea and on coasts. Risks are multiple: mortality in fishing gear (bycatch, post-catch mortality, ghost fishing), loss of functional habitats (including IAS) and disturbance. These threats lead to mortality, injury and reproductive failure. LIFE Mobile Marine Species aims to improve the conservation of four marine taxa: 5 elasmobranchs, 4 marine mammals, 12 seabirds and 2 sea turtles and their representative species. These taxa face similar threats that can only be effectively addressed jointly by: - Restoring and protecting functional important habitats for marine species with 630 favorable nesting sites restored, created or depolluted (and 50 related deaths avoided), and 200 ha of mudflats restored. - Reducing predation by non-native species on seabird by protecting 34% to 100% of the breeding population of 7 seabird species (depending on the species). - Reducing the pressure of disturbance due to uses on coast and at sea on marine species with 152 professional organisations and municipalities involved to improve their practices, efficient digital tools available for all Metropolitan coasts(+40,000 users) and the creation of 42 Strong Protection Areas (Zones de protection forte). - Reducing species mortality due to fishing gear: 22 devices tested to reduce by-catch on 89 boats representing 2% of metropolitan fleet (6000 days at sea monitored), reducing by at least 50% by-catch of marine turtles, birds and elasmobranchs on these boats and by 1/3 by-catch of dolphins and seals; 520 boats use tested by-catch reduction devices, 100 ghost nets removed, one new biodegradable net developed; new regulatory measures. - Increasing the acceptability of conservation measures and ensuring their sustainability and widespread replication. Life MMS has been co-constructed with stakeholders. It has broad support from administration, professionals, NGOs and scientists that will enable it to reach its goals

