PROJECT DESCRIPTION
BACKGROUND
Managers of Natura 2000 sites have multiple tasks and challenges. They must identify priorities, enforce prohibitions and limitations, and promote certain activities. Site managers are also involved in reporting on and monitoring habitats and species, and in carrying out impact assessments. The latter is key to integrating nature conservation effectively into land-use planning. But the quality of assessments is variable, and the understanding of procedures, legal constraints and implications is often confused and partial.

Training is needed, and can be improved, for Natura 2000 site managers in several areas, such as: on the Habitats Directive and procedures on the ground; on reporting methods and formats; and on the reliability, availability and collection methods of data. There are gaps in terms of skills, knowledge and capacity at all levels within organisations managing Natura 2000 sites. Meanwhile, the EU has stressed the importance of fully implementing the Nature Directives (i.e. the Birds and Habitats directives) to meet biodiversity targets. To improve the management of Natura 2000 sites, it is therefore crucial to provide learning opportunities for the individuals involved.


OBJECTIVES
The LIFE e-Natura2000.edu project will explore new approaches and learning methods to improve the knowledge and capacity of Natura 2000 site managers, of both public and private land, across the EU. It will analyse the training needed, and make available new ways of accessing information about the skills required for managing these sites and implementing policy. A mix of innovative tools and e-learning methods will be developed and tested.

A cohort of 60 will form the core group of participants, complemented by 500 casual users of the projects materials. The participants will represent the full spectrum of people involved in managing Natura 2000 sites across the EU (site-based staff, private landowners, protected area staff, rangers etc).

The main objectives are:

To develop a set of mechanisms to analyse competence gaps, such as a training needs tool, and a capacity-building framework amongst public and private Natura 2000 site managers across the EU;
To deliver a new, innovative toolbox of learning experiences, designed for the needs of all those involved in Natura 2000 site management, combining digital technology, media and traditional education methods (e.g. face-to-face workshops);
To improve the capabilities of Natura 2000 site managers, giving them the confidence and ability to implement the Nature Directives, and so increasing their effectiveness.
Expected results:

Identification of key competencies needed to manage a Natura 2000 site, by conducting an analysis of the knowledge and capacity gaps;
Development of test modules using innovative technologies for use by Natura 2000 site managers;
Selection of 60 participants with different experiences and knowledge (20 from Romania, 20 from Spain, 20 from across Europe) to form the core test group;
Conducting a training needs assessment among the test group and developing at least three modules for training. These will combinetraditional learning with innovative tools and online/digital learning experiences (e.g. webinars, videos, demonstrations, e-learning courses);
Replication and transfer of the tools developed among participants and target groups.
